The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hand made furniture and how to make it
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hand made furniture and how to make it

Author: Albert G. Glidden

Release date: June 9, 2025 [eBook #76260]

Language: English

Original publication: Spokane: Hand Made Furniture Shop, 1910

Credits: Charlene Taylor, A Marshall, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND MADE FURNITURE AND HOW TO MAKE IT ***

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.

  Original book did not include a table of contents, one has been
  created for convenience of the reader.

                           Table of Contents

                 General.
                 Chapter I.
                     Tools.
                     The Saw.
                     The Use of the Saw.
                     The Plane.
                     To Sharpen Planes.
                     To Use the Plane.
                     Chisels.
                     To Sharpen Chisels.
                     To Use the Chisel.
                     The Marking Gauge.
                     The Screw Driver.
                     The Bit Brace.
                     Bits.
                     To Sharpen Bits.
                     The Nail Set.
                     The Hammer.
                     Oil Stones.
                     The Mallet.
                     The Try Square.
                     The Steel Square.
                     The Sliding T Bevel.
                     The Dividers.
                     Two-foot Rule.
                 Chapter II.
                     Wood Working and Joining.
                     The Saw Horse.
                     Work Bench.
                     Bench Stop.
                 Chapter III.
                     Squaring and Jointing.
                     Half Tenon and Halving.
                     Halved Joint.
                     Mortise and Tenon.
                     Panelling.
                     Dowelling and Joining.
                     Mitring.
                     Dovetailing.
                 Chapter IV.
                     Fastenings.
                 Chapter V.
                     Dressing Off and Smoothing.
                 Chapter VI.
                     Staining, Dyeing, Filling, Polishing.
                 Designs
                     Piano Or Organ Bench.
                     Plant Stand.
                     Magazine Stand.
                     Music Cabinet.
                     Hall Seat.
                     Hat Tree.
                     Dining Table.
                     Chair.
                     Morris Chair.
                     Library Table.




                                HAND MADE
                                FURNITURE
                                   AND
                             HOW TO MAKE IT

  Designed for the use of those seeking either a pleasant and
  profitable occupation or such furniture for their homes as shall
  express their own artistic taste, and stand for sturdy honesty of
  purpose, simple beauty, comfort and durability.

                            Albert G. Glidden

                        HAND MADE FURNITURE SHOP,
                             Spokane, Wash.




                             Copywrited 1910
                                   by
                             A. G. Glidden.




                               GENERAL.


There is probably no home in which the comfort, convenience or artistic
appearance could not be improved by the addition or replacing of some
pieces of furniture. The reason is simple. They are furnished with
store furniture, and store furniture is made to sell; the designs
limited by the capabilities of the machines which make it; made of the
cheapest materials; put together in the quickest, rather than the best
way, and then finished up with the crudest varnish and stain to make
a fine appearance. It is a depressing sight to see this furniture on
moving day, piled on the sidewalk, scratched, broken, dingy, all its
fine pretense of beauty gone forever. On the other hand, the chairs,
tables, sideboards and other pieces that have come down to us through
generations were all made by hand, put together by hand and finished
by hand in the days when there was no machinery and the workman was an
artist. The result is that instead of finding its way to the scrap heap
this old furniture is as good today as ever, after two or three hundred
years of wear and tear and removal from place to place half round the
world. Hampered by no limitations of machinery these designers set the
standard for the world for all times. Such furniture is worth while,
and is an everlasting inspiration to the home-maker and worker.

Our new style, variously known as “Arts and Crafts,” “Mission,”
“Craftsman,” etc., is especially adapted to hand work, and while
differing from the rich old oak and mahogany of our fathers’ in form
and finish, is like them in all the qualities of beauty and durability
and is far more comfortable. A home furnished in this style not
only expresses the artistic taste of its inmates but also exerts an
influence of sturdy honesty of purpose, simplicity and absence of all
gaudy pretense, which both its frank, straight lines and freedom from
anything to hide or mar the natural beauty of the wood so forcibly
express. It is a style of which we can never tire and of which no
other can take the place. It will last for generations, for every part
is as strong as the wood of which it is made. You can make it and
make it better than you can buy in any store, for it is made in the
most natural way, after the most natural design, of the most natural
material.

Of course, it cannot be hoped that the mere reading of any book can
make an expert cabinet maker of an inexperienced workman, but the
instructions contained in this book will enable any one to make
furniture. Handsome, comfortable, durable furniture. The length of
time required on each of the exercises will, of course, vary with the
individual workman and his aptitude for the work. All that can be said
as to the number of times the exercises should be performed is simply
to keep at each one until you are satisfied with the results, you can
judge as well as any one when your work is good. Time spent in practice
is time well spent, for you are learning to make something which will
be with you for years to come.

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

Most people know more or less about the use of tools and to some it
will seem that we are unnecessarily explicit about things which to them
are matters of course, but as we are writing for those who have had no
experience whatever in the use of tools, as well as others, we have
begun with the rudiments and taken one after another in the order most
likely to assure rapid progress. For the same reason we have avoided,
in so far as possible, technical terms and trade names, though in some
cases it has been necessary to use the customary terms, as no others
will express the meaning. For instance, the use of the word “square,”
as applied to our work, does not always mean rectangular but oftener
means at right angles to adjoining surfaces. Thus, when we say “saw
square” or “plane square” we mean to make your surface straight and
true and at right angles with some other surface. The term “right
angles” will be easily understood by reference to Fig. 1. Whenever two
lines meet they form an angle, and having the direction of one line
and the degree of the angle we know the direction of the other line.
Thus in Fig. 1 all the lines meet at (a). Taking the line (a-b) as our
base and wishing to find any other line of which we have the degree
of angle we draw a circle around (a). The size of the circle does not
make any difference. A circle is divided into 360 degrees, therefore,
if we are given an angle of 90 degrees, we know that it is a quarter
of the circle and drawing a line from (a) to the outer rim of the
circle a quarter of the way around we have the line (a-c) which forms
an angle of 90 degrees with the line (a-b). In the same way an angle
of 30 degrees would be formed by a line drawn from (a) to the outer
rim of the circle ¹⁄₁₂th of the way round from (b) (a-d). Forty-five
degrees would be ⅛th of the way round (a-e), 60 degrees ⅙th of the
way round (a-f), 180 degrees half way round, and so on. The angle of
90 degrees is spoken of as a right angle and in our work one line of
the angle is said to be square to the other. We also use the term in
speaking of angles 1 in 6, or 2 in 6, etc. You will understand this if
you will take your steel square and place your rule diagonally across
it and when, for instance, we say 1 in 6 we would mean to place your
rule 6 in. from the corner of the square on one arm and 1 in. from the
corner on the other arm of the square; 2 in 6 would mean keep the rule
at 6 in. on one arm and move the other end of the rule 2 in. from the
corner on the other arm. In other words, an angle may be said to give
the degree of slant.

We have included in this book a few designs for pieces of furniture
in order to show the method of assembling the parts and the most
convenient way of laying out and beginning a piece of work. In this
connection we wish to impress upon you the importance of laying out the
whole of a piece of work before you begin to cut it at all. You will
appreciate this as you proceed.

In our cuts we have made no attempt at fine drawing but have used
the fewest possible lines for the sake of plainness and only so much
shading as is necessary. Single lines usually designate the outline of
solid parts. Dotted lines show the outlines of parts lying beneath the
surface, or in other words, as if seen through the object, and are used
merely to show the location of parts which would really be invisible.
Wavy lines are generally used where only a part of a piece is shown
and designate that the piece is really longer than drawn but the part
beyond the wavy line is not necessary in the illustration. We have used
shading to show end grain in some cases but more often to show where a
part is cut away, as in the side of a tenon, etc. Dimensions are shown
by arrow pointed lines. Where these lines point in opposite directions
with the figures between them, or point toward each other with the
figures at the end of one arrow, they give the distance in both cases
between the arrow points.

The choice of wood depends largely on the purpose for which it is to
be used and personal taste. You will probably have no occasion to use
other woods than fir, oak and mahogany, with possibly some pine. Fir
is soft and likely to splinter if not carefully handled, but is easy to
work, the grain is wavy and beautiful and it can be finished to equal
oak in beauty. Oak is harder but more durable and admits of a very high
polish. It is much stronger and therefore, except where proportion
requires size, the parts can be made much smaller than when using fir.
As, for instance, in chair and table legs, braces, etc. Oak also bends
better than fir but it is necessary to steam it for this purpose and
unless you have proper steam box and clamps to hold it until dry, we
do not advise attempting to bend the parts. Mahogany has been the most
highly prized of these three woods until recently, and is the most
expensive, but oak has largely taken its place in fine furniture of
this style, as it is more in keeping with the straight lines. Pine is
soft, light and not so likely to splinter as fir, but has little grain
and is not used extensively except in concealed parts where strength is
not essential. In most lumber, and especially that with much flake or
grain, you will find that the grain does not lay flat on the surface,
but comes up to the surface at an angle and in planing it is important
to cut in the direction of this grain, not against it, as in the latter
case it will chip up and leave nicks in the surface instead of cutting
smooth. In using the scraper on fir you have to be careful or it will
cut deeper in the soft grain of the wood than on the flake, and make a
wavy surface instead of a flat one. This, however, can be avoided with
a little care.

We trust that with these suggestions the following may be quite clear
to you, but if there is any point on which you are not quite clear, or
if there is any advice you would like we would be very glad to hear
from you and to assist you in any way that our experience will permit.




                              Chapter I.


TOOLS.

Right here and now we want to say, =keep your tools sharp=. Many
beginners are discouraged with the result of their work when the fault
is entirely with the dullness of their tools. A dull tool cannot do
good work no matter how skillful the workman may be. Therefore, we say
again, keep all tools sharp all the time. With this in mind, let us see
what tools are necessary for our purpose and how to sharpen, use and
care for them.


THE SAW.

The saw comes first in use and perhaps in importance. There are several
kinds, but you will need only one 24-inch rip saw, about 7 tooth (to an
inch) for sawing with the grain; one 20-inch cross-cut saw, 10 tooth,
for sawing across the grain; one 12-inch back saw, 12 tooth, for sawing
a perfectly straight, narrow smooth cut (kerf); one 12-inch compass
saw, 8 tooth, for sawing curves.

These saws are sharpened when you buy them and we do not advise you to
attempt to file your saws until you have learned by practice how to do
it properly. Have them sharpened by an expert, for while it is very
simple it requires skill, acquired only from experience. Do not neglect
it, however. A dull saw leaves a ragged edge and takes double effort.

If you desire to file your saws get an old one to practice on. It is
not a difficult thing to learn, and while opinions differ as to just
how the work should be done there are a few essentials which must be
observed. The following is the result of long experience and careful
study and will give satisfactory results:
